     A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for
      the most classical multiple flow direction algorithms
                               Julien Coatléven, Benoit Chauveau



      To cite this version:
    Julien Coatléven, Benoit Chauveau. A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most
    classical multiple flow direction algorithms. 2024. �hal-04734436�




                                   HAL Id: hal-04734436
                         https://hal.science/hal-04734436v1
                                 Preprint submitted on 14 Oct 2024




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access               L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-     destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub-     scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from            émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or       recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers.   publics ou privés.
Preprint




A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple
                            flow direction algorithms

                                Julien Coatléven ∗†, Benoit Chauveau ∗


      Abstract. In a recent paper, a consistency correction for the water flux using multiple flow direction
      (MFD) algorithms that account for exchanges between a cell and its neighbors was proposed, thanks to a
      reinterpretation of the MFD as a well chosen discretization of the Gauckler-Manning-Strickler continuous
      equation. Building on those results, we introduce here a general framework allowing to derive consistent
      expressions of the water flux for the most commonly used multiple/single flow direction (MFD/SFD) water
      flow routines, including versions in which water is flowing from a node to its neighbors. This general
      framework is shown to be sufficiently general to encompass the alternative continuous definition of the unit
      catchment area of the literature. Numerical examples illustrate the consistency and convergence of the
      proposed water flux reconstructions.


                                                     Introduction
A wide variety of mathematical models describing the flow of water could be used in landscape evolution
models (LEMs), depending on the prominent space and time scales considered. The most complete model is
undoubtedly the Navier-Stokes model which allows for very precise but prohibitively costly simulations. The
shallow-water approximation is sometimes used to solve rivers system (e.g. [2]) or to simulate glacial dynamics
[18]. Despite a reduced computational cost compared to the Navier-Stokes model, this model has not often been
explicitly deployed in LEMs. Probably one of the reasons is that computationally efficient water flow routing
algorithms have been developed during the last decades. Those algorithms are built assuming that the water
flow follows the direction of steepest descent (e.g. [33, 22, 20, 41, 28, 42, 40]), and are able to simulate relatively
complex water flow networks despite this inherent simplicity. Multiple flow direction (MFD) and single flow
direction (SFD) algorithms are among the most known water-flow routing families implemented in reference
LEMs such as in SIBERIA([54, 55, 53]), CAESAR-Lisflood ([5, 14]), FastScape ([9]), eSCAPE ([44]), CIDRE
([10]), EROS ([15]) or BadLand ([45]), or in stratigraphic models such as DionisosFlow ([27]). This list being not
exhaustive, the reader is referred to [49, 51, 50, 1, 32] for a complete review. Following the terminology of [1], we
consider two different families of water flow algorithms, based on their representation of the discretized domain.
These are referred to as cell-to-cell and node-to-node algorithms, respectively. The first category includes all
models that only consider interactions between a cell and its neighboring cells, while the second includes those
that focus on interactions between a node and its neighboring nodes. The main differences between the various
algoritms inside each family lie in their representation of the discretized domain (cell-to-cell or node-to-node)
and by the empirical choice made to distribute water among the mesh elements.
The empirical foundations of the MFD/SFD water flow routing and their lack of mathematical framework make
them very difficult to validate. A first behavior known since a long time is not very encouraging: the water flow
distribution Qw is mesh dependent. This is probably the most documented problem of the LEM community
since more than twenty years (e.g. [46, 35, 1]) and one that still disturbs current models. Smart solutions have
been published to minimize this effect without making it completely vanish ([38, 35]). An alternative definition
of the specific catchment area often used as a proxy for water flow was proposed in [24, 8], through the discrete
  ∗ IFP Énergies nouvelles, 1 et 4 avenue de Bois-Préau, 92852 Rueil-Malmaison, France
  † julien.coatleven@ifpen.fr




                                                               1
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



solution of an abstract uniform flow equation, which effectively solves the anomalous mesh dependency issue.
Independently and following another path, in [11] the simplest cell-to-cell MFD algorithms family has been
proved to coincide on Cartesian meshes with a classical discretization of the water mass conservation Gauckler-
Manning-Strickler model (GMS). The output of the MFD algorithms is shown to correspond exactly to a
mesh-dependent mean of the water flux associated with the discrete GMS model. This result not only explains
the mesh and numerical dependency since the output of the MFD does not fulfill the consistency criteria, but it
also provides a way to correct it in a post-processing step leading to a consistent discrete approximation of the
GMS water flux. This new discrete water flow is then as mesh independent as possible, in the usual numerical
analysis sense of convergence when the mesh size goes to zero.
The main purpose of this paper is to extend this result to a wider range of classical MFD/SFD algorithms,
including the node-to-node versions. Generalizing the results of [11], they can in fact all be corrected in a post-
processing step, finally solving the grid dependency issue while keeping the diversity of approaches considered in
the literature. To do so, we will need to consider a more general GMS model than that of [11]. This generalized
GMS model being also a generalization of the model proposed in [24, 8], this finally closes the loop between MFD
algorithms and the specific catchment area defined in [24, 8]. We believe that the resulting easy to implement
post-processing step could benefit to numerous existing water flow models built from MFD/SFD algorithms.
The paper will thus be organized as follows: in a first section we recall the continuous specific catchment area
model of [24, 8] and introduce our general GMS model, emphasizing their link. Next, we generalize the results
of [11] detailing the link between the general GMS model and a wider range of cell-to-cell MFD algorithms, and
explain how this allows their correction in a post-processing step. The recovered consistency is then illustrated
through numerical examples. In a third section, we extend those results to node-to-node MFD algorithms,
and again illustrate on numerical examples how the simple post-processing step we propose allows to recover
consistency. We conclude by some remarks on the applicability domain of the GMS model.


      1    Gauckler-Manning-Strickler models and multiple flow direction
                                   algorithms
In principle, the output of a MFD algorithm is the historically loosely defined “local discharge of water” Qw .
The practical computation of Qw , when not carefully conducted, is the weak point of many models causing
them to lose any hope of consistency in the mathematical sense of the term. This is one of the main reasons
why we observe mesh dependency is some LEMs. We recall in this section how to define a physically based
“local discharge of water” that maintains consistency. More details can be found in [11, 24, 8]. This discussion
was essentially already conducted in [12], thus no true originality is claimed here. We have chosen to recall this
in full details for the reader’s convenience, as well as to fix some vocabulary and notions. Notice that in [12],
it was furthermore been shown that an inadequate treatment of the coupling between water flow and sediment
transport leads to another kind of artificial mesh dependencies than those we consider here.
Classically, Qw is computed directly from the so-called drainage or catchment area CA (also referred as the
contributing area). For a given outlet of the topography, it corresponds to the area of the projection on Ω of the
part of the topography from which the water flows to the considered outlet ([31, 30, 8]). Despite being a very
intuitive notion, it has evaded for a long time a precise mathematical definition and was only obtained through
some algorithmic procedure. Classical multiple flow direction (MFD) algorithms precisely aim at providing
a practical way to compute a discrete approximation CA pKq of the catchment area CA for a mesh cell K
(where  stands for the mesh precision), and in this way a discrete approximation QK of Qw for cell K. As
is well documented ([16, 35, 36, 39]) the classical algorithms provide a discrete catchment area CA pKq that
depends on the cell size, geometry and orientation with respect to the flow. Several attempts can be found in
the literature to reduce this mesh dependency, defining the discrete water flow discharge QK associated to a
mesh cell K as QK “ pCA pKq{wpKqq, where wpKq is a normalization factor related to a geometric property
of the cell (cf [16]) or to an estimate of the flow width ([35]) defining the so-called (discrete approximation of


                                                        2
                                           J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



the) specific or unit catchment area (SCA/UCA).


                               z




                     hs + hw
                          hs

                                                      hw




                                       y
                                                                Ω
                                   x

                                                                               ∂Ω


                  Figure 1: Notations for the topography hs , water height hw and domain Ω


Recently, a new definition of the specific catchment area a at the continuous level was proposed in [24, 8] in a
more modern mathematical way. It consists in solving an abstract uniform flow equation:
                                              ˆ           ˙
                                                   ∇hs
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ ´div a              “ 1 in Ω,
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ          ||∇hs ||
                                                                                                             (1)
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ a ∇hs ¨ n “ 0
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ ||∇h ||                 on BΩin ,
                                               s

where the considered fixed geographical region (see figure 1) is modeled by means of a bounded connected
domain Ω P R2 , hs : Ω ÝÑ R is the function describing the topography , BΩin “ tx P BΩ | ∇hs ¨ n ą 0u is the
part of the boundary that is in going and n denotes the outward normal to Ω. Setting Qw “ a at the continuous
level, this finally leads to compute a consistent discrete approximation aK of a for a mesh cell K. The mesh
dependency of aK is thus reduced to the usual consistency errors of numerical schemes.
Solving (1) instead of resorting to one of the classical MFD algorithms could seem a very different approach at
first sight. Indeed, considering for instance the classical cell-to-cell algorithms of [22, 23, 28], one can see that
the main principle underlying those MFD algorithms is simply to distribute a fictitious water flow of a mesh cell
to the neighboring cells with lower elevation proportionally to a function of the slope, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The main result of [11] is that such a distributing scheme is in fact unexpectedly closely related to a well-chosen


                                                           3
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



discretization of a water flow model. A full proof is given for the most classical cell-to-cell MFD algorithms (for
instance those of [22, 23, 28]) for the following water flow model:
                                       ˇ
                                       ˇ ´div pkm hm ∇hs q “ Sw in Ω,
                                                   w
                                                                                                                (2)
                                       ˇ
                                             w ∇hs ¨ n “ Bw         on BΩin ,
                                       ˇ km hm
                                       ˇ

where hw is the water height, m a model parameter, Sw is the domain source, and Bw the boundary influx.
The coefficient km can be thought of as the inverse of a roughness coefficient. It is established in [11] that the
discrete quantity distributed by MFD algorithms is a non-consistent mean of the discrete water flux associated
with a finite volume approximation of (2), as we detail in next section.
To completely close the gap between MFD algorithms and (1) as well as to encompass a wider range of MFD
models of the literature, in the present paper we consider the following generalization of (2), which amounts to
a stationary water mass conservation equation with Gauckler-Manning-Strickler (GMS) flux modeling:
                           ˇ      ´                                     ¯
                           ˇ ´div km hw ηw phw qs´p       ||∇hs ||pw ∇hs “ Sw in Ω,
                           ˇ                           w
                                                    ref
                           ˇ                                                                                 (3)
                           ˇ km hw ηw phw qs´p   ||∇h   ||pw
                                                             ∇h   ¨ n “ B     on BΩ    ,
                           ˇ                   w
                                            ref       s         s         w         in

where hw is the water height, sref = 1 m.km-1 the reference slope, pw a model parameter and ηw the water
mobility function. For simplicity we assume here that the mobility function has no dimension and is a function
of hw only, and that the domain source Sw is given in m3 .s-1 km-2 such that its integral over a 2d area measured
in km2 coincides with a discharge in m3 .s-1 . The boundary influx Bw is measured in m3 .s-1 km-1 . The coefficient
km can be thought of as the Strickler coefficient or the inverse of the Gauckler-Manning coefficient up to a change
of unit (strictly speaking, this identification is truly valid for channels and if the mobility function ηw is equal to
a dimensionless hydraulic radius). For this choice of unit for Sw , km has the unit m.s-1 of a speed. Comparing
(3) with (1), we see that (1) corresponds to the particular case where km “ 1, pw “ ´1 and a “ hw ηw phw q,
while comparing (3) and (2) we recover (2) by choosing ηw phw q “ hw        m´1
                                                                                 and pw “ 0. In this sense the GMS
model (3) is a generalization of (1) and (2) that allows to include the classical ingredients (non linear slope
dependency and some spatial heterogeneity) of the MFD literature. Closely following [11], we explain in the
remaining of the paper how model (3) can be related to most of the MFD algorithms of the literature and how
it allows to correct them through a simple post-processing step.
Remark 1.1. To say that this model uses Strickler coefficients or the inverse of Gauckler-Manning coeffi-
cients does not necessarily mean that its scope of application is limited to channels: it depends to the specific
choice made on the model parameter values. Steady state analysis ([26, 7]) for channels suggests to use values
ηw phw q “ phw {href q1{2 and pw “ ´1{2, while the classical Gauckler-Manning-Strickler formula would coincide
with ηw phw q “ pRh phw q{href q2{3 with Rh phw q the hydraulic radius and again pw “ ´1{2. When applied to
large time and space scales landscape evolution models, these calibrations are no more valid and at this stage
we suggest considering ηw and pw as modeling parameters that can be tuned for each considered problem.

         2    Obtaining consistent cell-to-cell MFD algorithms through a
                            discretization of the GMS model
As mentioned above, the results of this section are mostly a quite straightforward generalization of the results
of [11] on (2) to the more general GMS model (3). We believe that the node-to-node version will be easier to
understand after detailing the simpler cell-to-cell one, which is the main motivation for this section.

2.1    Mesh description and the classical cell-to-cell MFD algorithms
To make precise statements and establish the correspondence with MFD algorithms, we need to introduce
quite a few notations for describing our meshes. Assume that Ω is a polyhedral bounded connected domain

                                                          4
                                       J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



of R2 , whose boundary is denoted BΩ “ ΩzΩ. We recall the usual finite volume notations describing a mesh
M “ pT , Fq of Ω. The set of the cells of the mesh T is a finite family of connected open disjoint polygonal
subsets of Ω, such that Ω “ YKPT K. For any K P T , we denote by |K| the measure of K, by BK “ KzK
the boundary of K, by ρK its diameter and by xK its barycenter. The set of faces of the mesh F is a finite
family of disjoint subsets of R2 included in Ω such that, for all σ P F, its measure is denoted |σ|, its diameter
hσ and its barycenter xσ . For any K P T , the faces of cells K corresponds to the subset FK of F such that
BK “ YσPFK σ. Then, for any face σ P F, we denote by Tσ “ tK P T | σ P FK u the cells of which σ is a
face. Next, for all cell K P T and all face σ P FK of cell K, we denote by nK,σ the unit normal vector to
σ outward to K, and dK,σ “ |xσ ´ xK |. The set of boundary faces is denoted Fext , while interior faces are
denoted Fint . Finally for any σ P Fint , whenever the context is clear we will denote by K and L the two cells
forming Tσ “ tK, Lu, as well as dKL “ |xK ´ xL |. This for instance allows when looping over the faces σ of cell
K to denote by L the other face of σ without resorting to a too heavy notation. To avoid any confusion with
the water height and the topography,  “ maxKPT ρK will denote the mesh size. For any continuous quantity
u, its discrete counterpart will be denoted uT “ ppuK qKPT , puσ qσPFext q where for any K P T uK is the constant
approximation of u in cell K while for any σ P Fext uσ is the constant approximation of u over face σ.
In the following we will assume that the mesh is orthogonal, i.e. there exists a family of centroids pxK qKPT
such that:
                                            xL ´ xK
                 xK P K̊ @K P T      and              “ nK,σ for σ P Fint , σ “ tK, Lu                     (4)
                                           |xL ´ xK |
and let us denote xσ the orthogonal projection of xK to the hyperplane containing σ for any σ P FK and any
K P T with dK,σ “ |xK ´ xσ |, as well as dKL “ |xK ´ xL |. Then, one can use a two-point finite volume scheme
to discretize diffusion operators with scalar diffusion coefficients (no tensors).
In the literature, multiple flow direction algorithms are often considered as purely algorithmic ways of dis-




Figure 2: Basic principle of the simplest cell-to-cell MFD algorithm: water is distributed to lower neighboring
cells proportionally to the slope (reproduced from [11])


tributing water from one region to another. Thus, they are generally described in a purely algorithmic fashion,
although they admit a reformulation as a linear system (first mentioned by [43] although without exhibiting an


                                                       5
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



explicit formula). Here, we have chosen to introduce the most classical MFD algorithm illustrated on figure (2)
following the algebraic formulation of [11] where it is detailed how to obtain it from its algorithmic description.
Denoting hs,K “ hs pxK q for any K P T and hs,σ “ hs pxσ q for any σ P Fext , from [11] we know that this
cell-to-cell MFD algorithm is equivalent to solving the following linear system for the unknown pr  qK qKPT
                                                    ÿ                |σ|r
                                                                        qL
                      qrK “ |K|Sw,K `                                      phs,L ´ hs,K q   @K P T             (5)
                                           σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L
                                                                    dKL sL

using an ordering for the cells of T based on decreasing topography hs,K and a lower triangular solver, where
Sw,K is the source term in cell K, the discrete slope sKL is given by

                                                    |σ|
                                           sKL “        phs,K ´ hs,L q “ ´sLK
                                                   dKL
and the total positive slope sK of cell K is given by
                                                     ÿ               |σ|
                                   sK “                                  phs,K ´ hs,L q
                                           σPFK XFint ,hs,K ěhs,L
                                                                    dKL

Indeed, the principle of the most classical distribution formula is simply to distribute the “flow” qrL in cell L
to the lower, neighouring cells K proportionally to the ratio sKL {sL of the discrete slope sLK between the
high cell L and the low cell K regarding the total positive slope sL of the high cell L. This is precisely the
meaning of formula (5) but in a reverse fashion, since it says that the total “flow” qrK in cell K is equal to
the local source terms and the flow coming from the higher neighboring cells L. Notice that in many cases of
the literature, since the MFD algorithm is applied on a uniform Cartesian mesh with the same space step in
each direction, the face measure |σ| is simply omitted (see for instance [22, 23, 28]), with no effect on the ratio
sKL {sK . It is not difficult to generalize the algebraic formulation (5) to more advanced MFD algorithms, for
instance those using a power of the slope. Here we recover such generalizations through the equivalence with
a discretization of the general GMS model. When the water source Sw,K is chosen constant equal to one, the
unknown qrK of the MFD algorithms is used to defined a discrete catchment area CA pKq for cell K by setting
CA pKq “ qrK . As explained in the previous section, the discrete “local discharge of water” QK associated is
computed by normalizing as qrK i.e. setting QK “ qrK {wpKq, where wpKq is a normalization factor. Two very
common normalizations are the diameter of the cell wpKq “ ρK ([16]) or the effective flow length in the cell,
which is defined as the length of segment defined by the intersection between the cell and the line going through
the center of the cell and oriented following the slope ∇hs ([35]).



2.2    Cell-to-cell MFD algorithms and the GMS model
The starting point of a finite volume discretization is to integrate equation (3) over each cell K:
                                ż     ´                                  ¯ ż
                                                       ´pw        pw
                              ´    div km hw ηw phw qsref ||∇hs || ∇hs “         Sw .
                                   K                                                 K

Denoting Sw,K “ Sw pxK q and using Stokes’ formula, this leads to:
                           ÿ ż
                       ´         km hw ηw phw qs´p          pw
                                                ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nK,σ “ |K|Sw,K .
                                                   w


                            σPFK       σ


To handle boundary terms, if one further assumes that hs,σ ě hs,K for any σ P Fext and K P Tσ which
amounts to assuming that water cannot leave the computational domain and is generally what is done in usual


                                                             6
                                               J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



presentation of MFD algorithms, then for σ P FK Fext we get:
                             ż
                                              ´pw
                            ´ km hw ηw phw qsref  ||∇hs ||pw ∇hs ¨ n « ´|σ|Bw,σ ,
                                          σ

              1
with Bw,σ “ |σ| σ Bw if hs,σ ą hs,K and 0 otherwise. Choosing a finite volume scheme then simply amounts to
                ş

choosing how to approximate each term appearing in the face integrals. The most natural and classical finite
volume scheme consists in choosing constant approximate values km,σ and Gs,σ for km and ||∇hs ||pw along each
face σ and to use an upwind scheme hup w,σ for the true unknown hw ηw phw q:
                  ż                                                                        ż
                                                                     ´pw
                ´ km hw ηw phw qs´p
                                  ref
                                     w
                                       ||∇h s || pw
                                                    ∇hs ¨ n « ´k    s
                                                                 m,σ ref ||G s,σ || pw up
                                                                                      hw,σ   ∇hs ¨ n.
                     σ                                                                                σ

    Finally, thanks to our hypothesis on mesh orthogonality we can use the two-point flux approximation (TPFA)
to compute σ ∇hs ¨ n. The TPFA consists in noticing that for a linear function hs , the gradient being constant
             ş

and satisfying ∇hs ¨ nK,σ “ d 1 phs pxL q ´ hs pxK qq, the following formula:
                                     KL


                                                                        |σ|
                                     ż                        ż
                                 ´        ∇hs ¨ n “ ´∇hs ¨        n“        phs pxK q ´ hs pxL qq,
                                      σ                       σ        dKL

is exact since d 1 pxL ´ xK q “ nK,σ and will thus be a first order approximation of the flux. More precisely,
                KL
denoting hw,K for any K P T the discrete water height value associated to cell K, for any K P T the proposed
finite volume scheme rewrites:
                      ÿ                                                 ÿ
                            τKL hup
                                 w,σ phs,K ´ hs,L q “ |K|Sw,K `                     |σ|Bw,σ ,
                    σPFK XFint                                               σPFK XFext ,hs,K ăhs,σ


                                    up “ hw,K ηw phw,K q if hs,K ě hs,L and hup “ hw,L ηw phw,L q if hs,K ă hs,L ,
                                                                             w,σ
where the upwind value is given by hw,σ
the transmissivity τKL is given by:
                                                  |σ|km,σ
                                         τKL “              ||Gs,σ ||pw ,
                                                dKL s´p
                                                      ref
                                                         w



and where Gs,σ “ 21 pGs,K ` Gs,L q and Gs,K is a discrete approximation of the gradient of hs in cell K. If the
gradient is known, we can simply take:
                                             Gs,K “ ∇hs pxK q
If only the pointwise values of hs are known, we use a discrete reconstruction of the gradient. To derive it, we
use:                                           ÿ
                                         Id “      |σ|pxσ ´ xK qnK,σ ,                                        (6)
                                                       σPFK

with Id the identity matrix in dimension d, leading to
                                              ÿ
                                   Gs,K “         |σ|Gs,K ¨ nK,σ pxσ ´ xK q,
                                                      σPFK

and thus on the orthogonal meshes we consider here as by consistency |σ|Gs,K ¨ nK,σ « σ ∇hs ¨ nK,σ , Gs,K is
                                                                                     ş

naturally given by:
                                     1      ÿ       |σ|
                            Gs,K “                      phs,L ´ hs,K qpxσ ´ xK q
                                    |K| σPF XF dKL
                                           K   int


                                          1     ÿ        |σ|
                                     `                       phs,σ ` bσ ´ hs,K qpxσ ´ xK q.
                                         |K| σPF XF     dKσ
                                                K   ext




                                                                  7
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



From the mathematical point of view, a natural choice for the face value km,σ is the harmonic mean:
                                                                                                ż
                             dKL km,K km,L                                                 1
                km,σ “                                   with for instance       km,K “               km @ K P T ,
                          km,K dL,σ ` km,L dK,σ                                           |K|     K

but many other choices are possible. Let us now recall the elementary proof given in [11]: gathering the faces
by upwinding kind, we get:
                                    ÿ
                                               τKL hw,K ηw phw,K q phs,K ´ hs,L q ´
                                   σPFK XFint ,hs,K ěhs,L

                    ÿ                                                                                 ÿ
                                   τKL hw,L ηw phw,L q phs,L ´ hs,K q “ |K|Sw,K `                                   |σ|Bw,σ .   (7)
          σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L                                                        σPFK XFext ,hs,K ăhs,σ

Setting                                                  ÿ
                                        sK “                            τKL phs,K ´ hs,L q ,
                                               σPFK XFint ,hs,K ěhs,L

and noticing that sL ą 0 as soon as there exists σ P FL X Fint such that hs,L ą hs,K , we see that equation (7)
can be rewritten:
                                          ÿ
              sK hw,K ηw phw,K q ´                    τKL hw,L ηw phw,L q phs,L ´ hs,K q “ |K|Sw,K .
                                         σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L


Defining the water outflux by qrK “ sK hw,K ηw phw,K q, we thus obtain:
                             ÿ                     qrL                                   ÿ
            qrK ´                            τKL       phs,L ´ hs,K q “ |K|Sw,K `                                 |σ|Bw,σ .     (8)
                                                   sL                             σPF XF
                    σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L                                                ,h
                                                                                          K     ext   s,K ăhs,σ



Using the definition of τKL , we clearly recover (5) if we choose km “ 1, pw “ 0 and Bw “ 0, and this shows the
equivalence between the MFD algorithms and the GMS model is established.
This equivalence between the classical MFD and the two-point flux approximation of the GMS allows to give a
continuous interpretation and generalization CApOq for any region O of the discrete CA pKq that is computed
by MFD algorithms only for mesh cells K. Indeed, from qrK “ sK hw,K ηw phw,K q and the consistency of the
two-point formula, we see that qrK approximates:
                                       ÿ ż              ´                               ¯`
                                                              ´pw
                    CA pKq “ qrK «          hw ηw phw q ´km sref ||∇hs ||pw ∇hs ¨ nK,σ    .
                                             σPFK    σ


This naturally leads us to define a continuous catchment area CApOq for any region O by setting:
                                      ż              ´                              ¯`
                            CApOq “       hw ηw phw q ´km s´p
                                                           ref
                                                              w
                                                                ||∇hs || pw
                                                                            ∇h s ¨ n   ,                                        (9)
                                               BO

where hw is the solution of (3) with Sw “ 1 and where we have denoted v ` the positive part of v (i.e.
v ` “ maxp0, vq). As a by-product, we see that we can indeed interpret the discrete catchment area CA pKq
computed through the classical cell-to-cell MFD algorithms as the total flux leaving cell K of a fictitious water
flow with a uniform water source Sw “ 1. Unfortunately, we also see that even at the continuous level, CApOq
strongly depends on the geometry of O and its orientation with respect to the flow. As a result when the
discrete catchment area CA pKq computed from MFD algorithms computing is used to estimate the discrete
“local discharge of water” QK , it produces cell and thus mesh dependency in the simulated surface water
distribution. To overcome this mesh dependency, since CApOq is the total flux leaving O, it is natural to


                                                                  8
                                          J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



try to define a specific catchment area (SCA) by rescaling the CA. The correct scaling would be to set the
normalization factor w to the length of the portion of BO along which the fictitious water flow is leaving O. A
corrected definition of the specific catchment at the continuous level in the spirit of [16, 35, 36] area would thus
be to use:
                      ˆż                                  ˙´1 ż            ´                            ¯`
         SCApOq “           χ´km s´pw ||∇hs ||pw ∇hs ¨ną0       hw ηw phw q ´km s´p          pw
                                                                                 ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ n
                                                                                    w
                                                                                                           ,    (10)
                                  ref
                        BO                                       BO

where χ is the indicator function (i.e. the function with value 1 when the condition is satisfied and 0 otherwise).
Depending on the orientation of the flow, the discrete counterpart
                                                  ¨                            ˛´1
                                                                 ÿ
                                  SCA pKq “ ˝                               |σ|‚    qrK ,
                                                    σPFK XFint ,hs,K ěhs,L


of such a normalization will sometimes match the choices of [16] or [35, 36] explaining their partial success. This
continuous SCA scales as an approximation of the continuous water flux magnitude:

                                        qw “ |km hw ηw phw q| s´p
                                                               ref ||∇hs ||
                                                                  w        pw `1
                                                                                 ,                             (11)

(in m3 s-1 km-1 ) but is not equal to it. The SCA defined by (10) is in fact a mean of qw along the outflow portion
of BO, and thus still retains some dependency in the geometry of O and its orientation with respect to the flow.
Thus, to obtain a mesh independent quantity it is much simpler and more natural to consider directly the water
flow magnitude qw rather than the SCA. This is precisely the consistency correction proposed in [11]: to use a
discrete version of qw instead o CA pKq or SCA pKq. Another strong argument for doing so is to notice that
the specific catchment area a of model (1) can be reinterpreted through (3) as computing qw since:

                          qw “ |km hw ηw phw q| s´p
                                                 ref ||∇hs ||
                                                    w         pw `1
                                                                    “ |a| ||∇hs ||´1`1 “ a,

as we have set a “ hw ηw phw q ě 0, pw “ ´1, km “ 1 and sref “ 1 to merge (1) inside (3). In this way, the
consistency correction of [11] for MFD algorithms is another path to recover the conclusions of (1), since qw is
a generalization of a to more complex water flow models.
The MFD formulation allows in turn some interesting observations for the Gauckler-Manning-Strickler model:
it is indeed clear that the choice of the water mobility function ηw has no influence on the water flux strength
qw , as it appears nowhere in (8) and (12). In the same way, only the contrasts of the coefficient km will impact
qw , as only ratios τKL {sK are appearing in (8) and (12).

2.3    Consistency post-processing for cell-to-cell MFD algorithms
To effectively compute an accurate discrete water flux magnitude qK for each cell K P T , from [11] we know
that we can reconstruct cellwise the water flux vector using (6) by setting:
                                             ÿ             τKL qrK
                          QK “                                     phs,K ´ hs,L qpxσ ´ xK q´
                                  σPFK XFint ,hs,K ąhs,L
                                                           |K|sK

                                         ÿ              τKL qrL
                                                                phs,L ´ hs,K qpxσ ´ xK q,                      (12)
                               σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L
                                                        |K|sL

and simply deduce a consistent water flux magnitude by setting

                                                      qK “ ||QK ||.                                            (13)


                                                             9
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



The convergence of the consistent water flux magnitude qK was rigorously established and illustrated in [11] for
the simpler model (2), up to providing error estimates. A straightforward although rather involved adaptation
of the proof in [11] would undoubtedly provide the convergence of qK to the continuous flux when the mesh size
ε goes to zero. In the present paper we limit ourselves to numerical confirmations of the convergence of qK in
the general setting.
We believe that the use of qrK or its approximately normalized versions instead of qK in the literature is the
main reason why such a strong mesh dependency was observed, without any significant improvement with mesh
refinement. Thus, it is important to use qK instead of qrK as is the correct output of a MFD algorithm, i.e.
using QK “ qK and not qrK or qrK {wpKq. Notice that from (12) and (13), it is obvious that computing qK can
certainly be considered as a post-processing consistency correction for qrK , that should be easy to implement in
legacy software.
For completeness let us finally mention that the assumption that hs,σ “ hs,K for any σ P Fext and K P Tσ
is not mandatory and was done only to exactly match the MFD linear system and simplify the presentation.
For open boundaries, since this assumption corresponds to assuming that water cannot leave the computational
domain, it suffices to modify the value of sK :
                            ÿ                                     ÿ
             sK “                       τKL phs,K ´ hs,L q `                 τKσ phs,K ´ hs,σ q ,
                    σPFK XFint ,hs,K ěhs,L                           σPFK XFext ,hs,K ěhs,σ

as well as the definition of QK :
                                                ÿ              τKL qrK
                            QK “                                       phs,K ´ hs,L qpxσ ´ xK q
                                      σPFK XFint ,hs,K ąhs,L
                                                               |K|sK

                                             ÿ               τKσ qrK
                                `                                    phs,K ´ hs,σ qpxσ ´ xK q
                                    σPFK XFext ,hs,K ąhs,σ
                                                             |K|sK
                                             ÿ               τKL qrL
                                ´                                    phs,L ´ hs,K qpxσ ´ xK q,                (14)
                                    σPFK XFint ,hs,K ăhs,L
                                                             |K|sL

with of course in both cases:
                                                          |σ|km,σ
                                                 τKσ “             ||Gs,σ ||pw .
                                                         dKσ s´p
                                                              ref
                                                                 w




2.4    Numerical results for the corrected cell-to-cell MFD algorithms
The consistency post-processing (12)-(13) for MFD algorithms precisely coincides with the replacement of the
computation of qrK or qrK {wpKq for a mesh cell K by a consistent discrete reconstruction qK of qw in each cell K.
Thus, apart from the usual discretization error no anomalous mesh dependency should remain in qK in practice,
contrary to what is observed for qrK {wpKq (i.e. SCA pKq) given by MFD algorithms. On the contrary, since the
quantity qrK approximates the outflux of a cell it is proportional to the perimeter of a cell, the only convergence
that can be expected for qrK is to zero, while the behavior of qrK {wpKq will strongly depend on the choice of
the normalization wpKq. The main purpose of this subsection is to illustrate the behavior of those quantities
through some easy to analyze numerical examples. Since it has no impact on the water flux qw which is the
main target of MFD algorithms, for simplicity we consider only the case of constant water mobility ηw phw q “ 1.
We consider two reference configurations. On the first one we focus on the consistency and convergence of qK
while illustrating that qrK even rescaled by the attempted values of wpKq from the literature cannot be a good
approximation of the flux. Simultaneously, we show that the method can easily handle heterogeneous speed
coefficients km . The second configuration allows us to assess the robustness of the method even when the slope
is non-linear (pw ą 0). To study the mesh dependency of the results, we consider three sequences of meshes,


                                                                10
                                         J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



all satisfying the orthogonality requirement (4). Namely we use two sequences of Cartesian meshes, the first
one with square cells and the second one with rectangular cells, and a sequence of Voronoı̈ meshes. Those three
sequences are illustrated on figure 3.




  (a) Cartesian mesh: square cells     (b) Cartesian mesh: rectangular cells            (c) Voronoi mesh

Figure 3: Three sequences of meshes designed to study the mesh dependency within the numerical analyses
presented in section 2.4



2.4.1    First test configuration: Gaussian topography and Gaussian water height
The domain Ω is the square Ω “s0, Lrˆs0, Lr, the exact topography is given by

                             hs px, yq “ hs,0 exp ´δ px ´ x0 q2 ` py ´ y0 q2
                                                 ` `                         ˘˘

where x0 “ y0 “ L{2 and the exact water height is given by

                             hw px, yq “ hw,0 exp ´α px ´ x0 q2 ` py ´ y0 q2
                                                 `    `                      ˘˘

In practice we will set L “ 1, hs,0 “ 1 and hw,0 “ 1. For this first configuration, we will consider three different
values of the speed coefficient km , with increasing order of difficulty. The first one is simply the constant case
km “ 1, the second one is a sinusoidal case:

                                          km “ 1 ` β sinpωπxq sinpωπyq

with β “ 0.1 and ω “ 3, and the final one is a Perlin noise perturbation :

                                                km “ 1 ` β θpx, yq

where the function θpx, yq is a Perlin noise [37] and the resulting coefficient km is depicted on figure 4. Since
qw depends on km , using these heterogeneous speed coefficients is a simple way to obtain not overly simplistic
values for the water flux magnitude qw . Finally, we fix the slope exponent pw to zero for this configuration.

From [11], we know that qK should converge towards qw in L2 norm. We display on figure 5 the corresponding
convergence curves, which confirm that we recover the expected convergence. To further emphasize the interest
of using qK instead of qrK {wpKq, on figures 6 to 14 we display for each combination of mesh sequence and value


                                                        11
     A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                               algorithms




                     (a)                                             (b)




                                     Sinusoidal km                                Perlin noise km

                             Figure 4: The sinusoidal and perlin noised-based speed coefficients km



                           Constant km                          Sinusoidal km                               Perlin km
              −3
                                                     −4                                      −3
              −4


log ||qK − qw ||L2
                                                     −5
              −5                                                                             −4
              −6                                     −6
                                                                                             −5
              −7                                     −7
                                                                                             −6
                                     Square                                  Square                                  Square
              −8                   Rectangular       −8                    Rectangular                             Rectangular
                                    Voronoı̈                                Voronoı̈         −7                     Voronoı̈
              −9                                     −9
               −5    −4    −3 −2         −1      0    −5   −4    −3 −2          −1       0        −5   −4   −3 −2       −1       0
                            log                                  log                                       log 

Figure 5: Convergence curves for qK towards qw for the first test configuration, for each mesh sequence and
each choice for km



of km , the exact water flux magnitude qw , the discrete water flux magnitude qK , and qrK {wpKq for the two
choices of normalization wpKq. We display those four values for the finest mesh of each sequence.
We clearly see that qK is a good approximation of qw . However, the mesh dependency of qrK {wpKq appears
on each of those example. The normalization wpKq “ ρK leads to the correct value range for qrK {wpKq when
compared to qK or qw . The effective length normalization gives the correct order of magnitude, but not exactly
the correct value range. The normalization wpKq “ ρK leads to a very strong mesh dependency, and a value


                                                                12
                                       J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 6: Water flux (top view) obtained for constant km on the finest Cartesian mesh with square cells. (a) -
Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq
equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the effective
flow length in the cell.




qrK {wpKq very far from the correct one. On the two Cartesian mesh sequences for each value of km (figures


                                                      13
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 7: Water flux (top view) obtained for constant km on the finest Cartesian mesh with rectangular cells.
(a) - Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with
wpKq equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the
effective flow length in the cell.




6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13), we see that qrK {wpKq is strongly biased in the main directions of the mesh (the two axis


                                                      14
                                      J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




       (a)                                                (b)




       (c)                                                (d)




Figure 8: Water flux (top view) obtained for constant km on the finest Voronoı̈ mesh. (a) - Exact solution -
(b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the cell
diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the effective flow length in
the cell.




x and y), and comparing the two sequences we clearly obtain different solutions despite the fact that the two


                                                     15
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms




       (a)                                                  (b)




       (c)                                                  (d)




Figure 9: Water flux (top view) obtained for sinusoidal km on the finest Cartesian mesh with square cells. (a) -
Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq
equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the effective
flow length in the cell.




mesh sequences only slightly differ by the shape of the cells. On the Voronoı̈ mesh sequence (figures 8, 11, 14),


                                                       16
                                       J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 10: Water flux (top view) obtained for sinusoidal km on the finest Cartesian mesh with rectangular cells.
(a) - Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with
wpKq equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the
effective flow length in the cell.




since the mesh is much less biased towards any specific direction, we start to see the correct solution shape


                                                      17
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 11: Water flux (top view) obtained for sinusoidal km on the finest Voronoı̈ mesh. (a) - Exact solution -
(b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the cell
diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the effective flow length in
the cell.




appear, however qrK {wpKq is very noisy and influenced by the mesh cells shape, and in any case it is not a good


                                                      18
                                      J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




       (a)                                                (b)




       (c)                                                (d)




Figure 12: Water flux (top view) obtained for Perlin noised km on the finest Cartesian mesh with square cells.
(a) - Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with
wpKq equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the
effective flow length in the cell.




approximation of qw or any continuous quantity. The observations are almost the same for the other choice of


                                                     19
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 13: Water flux (top view) obtained for Perlin noised km on the finest Cartesian mesh with rectangular
cells. (a) - Exact solution - (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq
with wpKq equal to the cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to
the effective flow length in the cell.




normalization where wpKq is the effective length, with the main difference that one Cartesian meshes, qrK {wpKq


                                                      20
                                       J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




       (a)                                                 (b)




       (c)                                                 (d)




Figure 14: Water flux (top view) obtained for Perlin noised km on the finest Voronoı̈ mesh. (a) - Exact solution
- (b) - Simulated water flux qK - (c) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the
cell diameter - (d) - Simulated normalized water outflux qrK {wpKq with wpKq equal to the effective flow length
in the cell.




is much less biased towards the Cartesian directions. Those experiments confirm our theoretical observation


                                                      21
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



on qrK {wpKq and qK : the former cannot be a good discrete approximation since it is strongly mesh dependent,
while the later is a consistent approximation of qw , which converges well to qw even on Voronoı̈ meshes for the
difficult case of the Perlin noised speed coefficient.


2.4.2    Second test configuration: perturbed mono-dimensional topography




     rs = 1, ps = 0                        rs = 3/2, ps = 1                           rs = 2, ps = 0

                    Figure 15: The three topographies hs of the second test configuration


   The domain Ω is the rectangle Ω “s0, Lx rˆs0, Ly r with Lx “ 1 and Ly “ 5, and the topography hs and
water height hex
              w take the form:
                                ˇ
                                                          Nb
                                                                  x ´ xp y ´ yp
                                ˇ                        ÿ      ˆ               ˙
                                ˇ hs px, yq “ hs,x pxq `     gb         ,         ,
                                ˇ
                                ˇ                        p“1
                                                                    δx     δy
                                ˇ
                                ˇ hex px, yq “ hw,x pxq,
                                   w


The topography hs incorporates Nb small smooth bumps randomly positioned at points pxp , yp q chosen such
that they do not interfere with the boundaries of the domain, with the smooth bump function given by:
                                          ˇ
                                                          ´γ
                                          ˇ           ˆ        ˙
                                          ˇ Hpert exp            exppγq   for r2 “ x2 ` y 2 ď 1,
                   gb px, yq “ gb pr2 q “ ˇ
                                          ˇ             1 ´ r2
                                          ˇ
                                          ˇ 0                             otherwise .

In we use practice Nb = 8, Hpert = 0.03, γ = 10 and δx =δy = 0.25. For the mono-dimensional functions
phs,x , hw,x q we have chosen to re-use some of the stationary solutions proposed in [12]. Those functions are
parametrized by six parameters rs , ps , kg , kw , Ss,x and Sw,x . In the following test case, we will restrict
ourselves to the configuration kg “ kw “ 5 as well as Ss,x “ 10 and Sw,x “ 1, while the couple prs , ps q
will take the values p1, 0q, p3{2, 1q and p2, 0q to change the curvature of the topography. The corresponding
mono-dimensional functions hs,x are such that hs,x p´x, yq “ hs,x px, yq, and they are given for x ě 0 by:


                                                         22
                                                        J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



              . In the case prs , ps q “ p1, 0q:
                                                          ˆ                                                   ˙
                                                                 x       kg                        kg
                                hs,x “ hs,x p0q ´ Ss,x                ´ 2 2 ln |kg ` kw Sw,x x| ` 2 2 ln |kg | ,
                                                              kw Sw,x  kw Sw,x                   kw Sw,x


              . In the case prs , ps q “ p3{2, 1q:
                                                                      1
                                                      ps ` 1 Ss,x
                                                               ps `1
                                                                                     rs ps {pps `1q
                                    hs,x “ hs,x p0q ´                           rs
                                                                  rs ppkg ` kw Sw,x x q             ´ kgps {pps `1q q
                                                       ps rs kw Sw,x


              . In the case prs , ps q “ p2, 0q:

                                                                     Ss,x                2
                                               hs,x “ hs,x p0q ´            pln kg ` kw Sw,x x2 ´ ln pkg qq.
                                                                               `               ˘
                                                                        2
                                                                   2kw Sw,x


In all cases the value for hs,x p0q is such that hs,x pLx{2q “ 0. To avoid some numerical truncation errors for
higher values of pw , for the water height we do not exactly follow [12] and use instead the simpler function:
                                                                                              pw `1
                                                     hw,x “ pSw,x xqpkg ` kw pSw,x xqrs q ps `1 ,

For this second configuration, we consider the three values 0, 1 and 2 for the slope exponent pw . We restrict
ourselves to the case of a constant speed coefficient km “ 1 and the Cartesian mesh sequence with square cells.

                              rs = 1, ps = 0                              rs = 3/2, ps = 1                          rs = 2, ps = 0
                     4                                                                                 4

                     2                                        0                                        2


log ||qK − qw ||L2
                     0                                                                                 0
                                                           −2
              −2                                                                                      −2
                                                           −4
                                               pw = 0                                        pw = 0   −4                             pw = 0
              −4                               pw = 1                                        pw = 1                                  pw = 1
                                               pw = 2                                        pw = 2                                  pw = 2
                                                           −6                                         −6
                         −4    −3 −2            −1                   −4     −3 −2            −1                −4    −3 −2           −1
                                 log                                         log                                     log 

Figure 16: Convergence curves for qK towards qw for the second test configuration, for each value of pw and for
each value of the couple prs , ps q


On figure 16, we show the convergence curves for this second test configuration for each value of pw and each
choice of the couple prs , ps q. We clearly recover the expected convergence, confirming the ability of qk to
approximate qw for various values of pw .


                                                                          23
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



 3    A consistency post-processing for the classical node-to-node MFD/SFD
                                    algorithms

The objective of this section is to explain how to recover consistency by a simple post-processing step for the
most classical node-to-node flow routing algorithms, again through establishing a link with a discretization of
the continuous Gauckler-Manning-Strickler model. Such an explicit interpretation seems to be absent from the
literature, so at least to the author’s knowledge the results of this section are completely new. For simplicity
we restrict ourselves in this section to uniform Cartesian meshes, and we adopt the usual Cartesian index pi, jq
notation for designating its nodes (see Fig. 17) as well as ∆x and ∆y for the Cartesian cell side lengths. This is
by no means a restriction but simply a more convenient way to explain how to link node-to-node flow routing
with Gauckler-Manning-Strickler models.


3.1    Node-to node MFD/SFD algorithms and the GMS model
In order to reinterpret the node-to-node flow routing algorithms as finite volume schemes, we must associate a
volume to each node. The easiest way to do so is to consider the dual mesh, formed by joining the centers of
the cells of the primal mesh (see again Fig. 17, where the dual mesh corresponds to the dashed lines). On the
dual mesh, the node pi, jq of the primal mesh becomes the center of the dual cell Ki,j .




                    Figure 17: The Cartesian mesh (plain lines) and its dual (dashed lines)

In Fig. 18, we propose a decomposition of the boundary of the dual Cartesian cell Ki,j centered on the primal
                                                                                                     i˘1
internal node pi, jq into 12 faces pσl q1ďlď12 . The faces σj˘1 are of length γx ∆x , and the faces σj˘1 of length
1´γx                                                                          j˘1           1´γy
  2 ∆x. In the same way, faces σi˘1 are of length γy ∆y and the faces σi˘1 of length          2 ∆y. Using those


                                                       24
                                            J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




                     Figure 18: Decomposition and notations for the dual Cartesian cell boundaries

notations, we integrate (3) over the dual cell Ki,j to get:
                           12 ż
                                  km hw ηw phw qs´p
                           ÿ
                                                             pw
                        ´                        ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j “ |Ki,j |Sw,Ki,j .
                                                    w


                               l“1 σl

On the four faces σi´1 , σi`1 , σj´1 and σj`1 , we use the same finite volume discretization than before:
     ż
                                                        γx ∆x
           km hw ηw phw qs´p           pw
                           ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j « pw
                              w
                                                               km,σj´1 ||Gs,σj´1 ||pw hup
                                                                                       w,σj´1 phs,i,j´1 ´ hs,i,j q,
      σj´1                                             sref ∆y
and
      ż
                                                              γy ∆y
                 km hw ηw phw qs´p          pw
                                ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j «
                                   w
                                                                      km,σi´1 ||Gs,σi´1 ||pw hup
                                                                                              w,σi´1 phs,i´1,j ´ hs,i,j q,
          σi´1                                               spref
                                                                w
                                                                   ∆x
and
      ż
                                                              γx ∆x
                 km hw ηw phw qs´p          pw
                                ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j «
                                   w
                                                                      km,σj`1 ||Gs,σj`1 ||pw hup
                                                                                              w,σj`1 phs,i,j`1 ´ hs,i,j q,
        σj`1                                                 spref
                                                                w
                                                                   ∆y
and
      ż
                                                              γy ∆y
                 km hw ηw phw qs´p          pw
                                ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j «
                                   w
                                                                      km,σi`1 ||Gs,σi´1 ||pw hup
                                                                                              w,σi`1 phs,i`1,j ´ hs,i,j q,
          σi`1                                               spref
                                                                w
                                                                   ∆x
while for the remaining height cells, we gather the faces to form the corners illustrated in Fig. (18). More
precisely, we denote:
                                                         j´1
                                           σ i´1,j´1 “ σ i´1 Y σ i´1
                                                                 j´1 ,


                                                              25
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms


                                                             j`1
                                               σ i´1,j`1 “ σ i´1 Y σ i´1
                                                                     j`1 ,

                                                             j´1
                                               σ i`1,j´1 “ σ i`1 Y σ i`1
                                                                     j´1 ,

                                                             j`1
                                               σ i`1,j`1 “ σ i`1 Y σ i`1
                                                                     j`1 ,

those four corners, σi˘1,j˘1 thus being the corner corresponding to the neighboring cell Ki˘1,j˘1 . On those
corners, we perform the same discretization than before considering the whole corner as if it was a single face:
in other words we use constant values km,σ and ||Gs,σ ||pw for km and ||∇hs ||pw along the corner, an upwind
scheme for the unknown hw ηw phw q and the a two-point flux formula for in the average normal direction to the
corner. Denoting p∇hs qσi˘1,j˘1 the equivalent constant gradient exact for linear function underlying the TFPA
along the corner, this leads to the following approximation:
                                ż
                                         km hw ηw phw qs´p          pw
                                                        ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ¨ nKi,j «
                                                           w

                                  σi˘1,j˘1

                                                                                      ż
                     km,σi˘1,j˘1 s´p                  pw up
                                  ref ||Gs,σi˘1,j˘1 || hw,σi˘1,j˘1 p∇hs qσi˘1,j˘1 ¨
                                     w
                                                                                                  nKi,j .
                                                                                       σi˘1,j˘1

where along each σi˘1,j˘1 we have again used a constant approximate value km,σi˘1,j˘1 and Gs,σi˘1,j˘1 for km
and ||∇hs ||pw along each face σ and to use an upwind scheme hup  w,σi˘1,j˘1 for the true unknown hw ηw phw q. By
construction, we have:
                                                   p1 ´ γy q        p1 ´ γx q
                               ż
                                         nKi,j “ ˘           ∆yex ˘           ∆xey .
                                σi˘1,j˘1              2                 2
Denoting
                                                    p1 ´ γx q      p1 ´ γy q
                                    |σi˘1,j˘1 | “             ∆x `           ∆y “ δ,
                                                        2             2
we seek γx and γy such that:

                       p1 ´ γx q           ∆y                     p1 ´ γx q           ∆x
                                 ∆x “                      and              ∆y “                 ,
                          2δ          p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2                2δ          p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2

leading to:
                                           2δ∆y {∆x                            2δ∆x {∆y
                              γx “ 1 ´                      and γy “ 1 ´                     ,              (15)
                                         p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2                     p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2
which can be achieved with γx ě 0 and γy ě 0 provided δ satisfies:
                                               ˆ         ˙
                                         1       ∆x ∆y
                                 0 ď δ ď min        ,      p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2 .                                (16)
                                         2       ∆ y ∆x

With this choice for γx and γy , for all δ satisfying (16) we get that

                                                      ˘∆x                ˘∆y
                             ż
                                        nKi,j “                 ex `                ey ,
                               σi˘1,j˘1          p∆x ` ∆y q
                                                    2     2 1{2      p∆x ` ∆2y q1{2
                                                                       2


and thus the average normal at the corner σi˘1,j˘1 is precisely pointing from xKi,j to xKi˘1,j˘1 . Thus it is
natural to use the two point flux formula:
                                        ż
                                                                δ
                       p∇hs qσi˘1,j˘1 ¨           nKi,j «                phs,i˘1,j˘1 ´ hs,i q.
                                         σi˘1,j˘1         p∆ 2 ` ∆2 q1{2
                                                             x    y


                                                            26
                                            J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



The upwinding is done exactly as before, following the sign of the difference in elevation hs ` b between the two
value forming the TPFA. This gives for the non-corners:
                                     ˇ
                                     ˇ hw,i,j ηw phw,i,j q      if hs,i,j ě hs,i˘1,j ,
                            up
                           hw,σi˘1 “ ˇ
                                     ˇ
                                     ˇ hw,i˘1,j ηw phw,i˘1,j q if hs,i,j ă hs,i˘1,j ,
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ hw,i,j ηw phw,i,j q     if hs,i,j ě hs,i,j˘1 ,
                            up
                           hw,σj˘1 “ ˇ
                                      ˇ
                                      ˇ hw,i,j˘1 ηw phw,i,j˘1 q if hs,i,j ă hs,i,j˘1 ,
and for the corners:
                                         ˇ
                                         ˇ hw,i,j ηw phw,i,j q              if hs,i,j ě hs,i˘1,j˘1 ,
                          hup
                           w,σi˘1,j˘1 “ ˇ
                                        ˇ
                                         ˇ hw,i˘1,j˘1 ηw phw,i˘1,j˘1 q      if hs,i,j ă hs,i˘1,j˘1 .

For the gradient, we use for the non-corners:
                                 1                                               1
                    Gs,σi˘1 “      pGs,Ki˘1,j ` Gs,Ki,j q        and Gs,σj˘1 “     pGs,Ki,j˘1 ` Gs,Ki,j q
                                 2                                               2
and for the corners:
                                                  1
                                                    pGs,Ki˘1,j˘1 ` Gs,Ki,j q
                                        Gs,σi˘1,j˘1 “
                                                  2
In the same way, for the face value of km we use the following harmonic means for the non-corners:

                                        dKi,j Ki˘1,j km,Ki,j km,Ki˘1,j                2km,Ki,j km,Ki˘1,j
                    km,σi˘1 “                                                    “
                                 km,Ki,j dKi˘1,j ,σi˘1 ` km,Ki˘1,j dKi,j ,σi˘1       km,Ki,j ` km,Ki˘1,j

and
                                        dKi,j Ki,j˘1 km,Ki,j km,Ki,j˘1                2km,Ki,j km,Ki,j˘1
                    km,σj˘1 “                                                    “
                                 km,Ki,j dKi,j˘1 ,σj˘1 ` km,Ki,j˘1 dKi,j ,σj˘1       km,Ki,j ` km,Ki,j˘1
and for the corners:
                                       dKi,j Ki˘1,j˘1 km,Ki,j km,Ki˘1,j˘1                    2km,Ki,j km,Ki˘1,j˘1
            km,σi˘1,j˘1 “                                                               “
                            km,Ki,j dKi˘1,j˘1 ,σi˘1,j˘1 ` km,Ki˘1,j˘1 dKi,j ,σi˘1,j˘1       km,Ki,j ` km,Ki˘1,j˘1
                       b
where dKi,j ,σi˘1,j˘1 “ ∆2x ` ∆2y is the distance between Ki,j and the corner point belonging to σi˘1,j˘1 . To
get more compact notations, let us denote

                       N pi, jq “ tpm, nq P ti ´ 1, i, i ` 1u ˆ tj ´ 1, j, j ` 1u | pm, nq ď pi, jqu ,

the neighbors of node pi, jq, and define the transmissivities:
                  ˇ γx ∆x
                  ˇ
                            k        ||Gs,σj˘1 ||pw                         if pm, nq “ pi, j ´ 1q or pi, j ` 1q,
                  ˇ sref ∆y m,σj˘1
                  ˇ pw
                  ˇ
                  ˇ γy ∆y
           m,n
          τi,j “ ˇ pw
                  ˇ          km,σi˘1 ||Gs,σi˘1 ||pw                         if pm, nq “ pi ´ 1, jq or pi ` 1, jq,
                  ˇ sref ∆x
                              δ
                  ˇ
                                                                  pw
                  ˇ s p∆2x ` ∆2y q1{2 km,σi˘1,j˘1 ||Gs,σi˘1,j˘1 ||
                  ˇ
                  ˇ pw                                                      otherwise,
                     ref

assuming for simplicity that the gradients Gs,σ are obtained on the dual mesh in the same way as in the
cell-to-cell case (of course, a reconstruction formula using also the diagonal neighbors is possible). Using those


                                                                 27
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



notations, we get gathering by upwind kind as in the case of the cell-to-cell flow routing the following expression
for the proposed finite volume scheme on the dual mesh:
                                             ¨                                            ˛
                                                    ÿ              m,n
                         hw,i,j ηw phw,i,j q ˝                    τi,j  phs,i,j ´ hs,m,n q‚
                                                   pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ąhs,m,n

                   ¨                                                                                       ˛
                                   ÿ                   m,n
                  ´˝                                  τi,j hw,m,n ηw phw,m,n qphs,m,n ´ hs,i,j q‚ “ |Ki,j |Sw,i,j .
                    pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ăhs,m,n

Proceeding as in the cell-to-cell case, denoting:
                              ÿ               m,n
            si,j “                          τi,j  phs,i,j ´ hs,m,n q                      and     qri,j “ hw,i,j ηw phw,i,j qsi,j ,
                       pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ąhs,m,n

we finally get:               ¨                                                                       ˛
                                             ÿ                         m,n    qrm,n
                       qri,j ´ ˝                                      τi,j          phs,m,n ´ hs,i,j q‚ “ |Ki,j |Sw,i,j .             (17)
                                                                              sm,n
                                pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ăhs,m,n

The flow sharing formula common to all flow routing algorithms of the literature identifies in this context with
the ratios:
                                           1 m,n
                                              τ   phs,m,n ´ hs,i,j q,
                                         sm,n i,j
for pm, nq P N pi, jq, hs,i,j ă hs,m,n , which expresses how node pi, jq receives water from other nodes. Reversing
the point of view, it rewrites in probably more familiar fashion by expressing how node pi, jq distributes water
                                                                       m,n
to its neighbors through the flow sharing formula (noticing that τi,j      “ τm,n
                                                                               i,j
                                                                                   ):
                                                    m,n
                                                   τi,j maxp0, hs,i,j ´ hs,m,n q
                                               ÿ                  1       1                           .                               (18)
                                                            m ,n
                                                           τi,j  maxp0, hs,i,j ´ hs,m1 ,n1 q
                                         m1 ,n1 PN pi,jq

Notice that several attempts of the literature at improving the behavior of the flow routing consider powers q
of the two point slope instead of the slope in the flow sharing formula, which with our notations rewrites:
                                                   m,n
                                                  τi,j maxp0, hs,i,j ´ hs,m,n qq
                                              ÿ               1       1                                .                              (19)
                                                            m ,n
                                                           τi,j  maxp0, hs,i,j ´ hs,m1 ,n1 qq
                                         m1 ,n1 PN pi,jq

Another important consequence of the formal identification of cell-to-cell flow routing algorithms with a numer-
ical scheme for the stationary Gauckler-Manning-Strickler model is the fact that if one wants to incorporate
powers of the slope in the flow distribution procedure, then one should not use powers of the directional slope
  1
dKL
      phs,L ´ hs,K q but rather use powers of ||Gs,σ || to remain consistent with a continuous model incorporating
powers of ||∇hs ||. Otherwise, the consistency of the flow routing algorithm will be lost again. In [42] it is even
suggested to choose different values of q for different grid sizes, emphasizing this non-consistency. However, the
sought flow concentration effect can be achieved in a consistent manner by (18) through the use of pw with value
pw “ q ´1: the full gradient and not only the directional gradient being used this way, this does not compromise
consistency and a value independent of the mesh should be chosen according to physical considerations. An
option that we do not consider here is to make the value of pw spatially variable, as was suggested in [40] but
still on the non-consistent formulation (19).


                                                                              28
                                         J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



Although (19) clearly leads to some non consistency, this expression is useful to derive a classification of the
most prominent flow routing algorithms of the literature. To exactly match the definitions of most node-to-
node flow routing schemes of the literature, we now consider the special ?
                                                                         case of square cartesian cells for which
∆x “ ∆y “ ∆xy . In this case we get from (15) that γx “ γy “ 1 ´ p2δq{p 2∆xy q. It remains to choose a value
for δ. The most natural choice is choose to enforce δ “ γx ∆x “ γy ∆y and thus balance the contribution to each
neighbor. This immediately leads to:
                                        ?                               ?
                                          2                               2
                                  δ“      ?   ∆xy and γx “ γy “           ? ,
                                      2` 2                            2` 2
implying that:
                                                               ?                           ?
                      δ            1                 γ x ∆x      2               γ y ∆y      2
                               “    ?         and           “    ?       and            “    ? ,
                 p∆x ` ∆y q
                   2    2  1{2
                                 2` 2                  ∆y     2` 2                ∆x      2` 2
                                                                                     ?
thus the diagonal transmissivities differ from the non-diagonal ones by the factor 1{ 2 which corresponds to
the D8, Rho8 and most MFD algorithms. To recover the FD8/TOPMODEL noticing that the       ?
                                                                                              L1 and L2 non
diagonal and diagonal “face measures” of this MFD algorithm satisfy L1 “ ∆xy {2 and L2 “ 42 ∆xy , we recover
the same weighting within our notations by setting
                                            ?
                                              2                       1
                                       δ“       ∆xy and γx “ γy “ ,
                                             4                        2
which is compatible with (15) as in this case:

                      p1 ´ γx q      p1 ´ γy q       1      ∆x               ∆y
                                ∆x “           ∆y “ ? “                “                .
                         2δ             2δ            2 p∆x ` ∆y q
                                                          2    2   1{2   p∆x ` ∆2y q1{2
                                                                           2


Finally denoting:
                                          m,n
                                        ∆Hi,j “ maxp0, hs,i,j ´ hs,m,n q,
in table 1 we recast the most classical MFD algorithms using our notations, with pw “ 0 for all the presented
methods. For the Rho8 method ([20]), the ρ8 parameter is a random number generated for each face, while for
the MFD-md ([40]), the parameter e is the maximum downslope gradient and f peq “ 8.9 minpe, 1q ` 1.1.

We see from table 1 that many classical MFD/SFD schemes can be reinterpreted in the context of the GMS
model. In particular, the MFD (Freeman 1989) and the FD8 algorithms exactly correspond to the quantity qrK
obtained from a coherent discretization of the GMS model, since they set q “ 1. Meanwhile, notice that MFD
(Freeman 1991) and MFD (Holmgren 1994) are attempts to correct qri,j obtained given by (Freeman 1989) by
using a value of q not equal to one, and the same holds for TOPMODEL and MFD-md with respect to FD8.
For those scheme, before reconstructing qi,j from qri,j as we will detail in next subsection, one must first go back
to the correct value q “ 1 to recover a consistent approximation of qw . The sought flow concentration effect of
those schemes can be recovered in a consistent fashion by increasing the value of pw instead of introducing q.
Finally, it is clear that the chosen value for km,σ should be a discretization of an inverse of a continuous
roughness with a more or less physical interpretation. Apart from the unavoidable sampling induced by the
mesh, it should be as mesh independent as possible and in particular should not depend on cell orientations.
The single flow direction D8 and Rho8 methods reinterpreted this way introduce a coefficient km,σ that is clearly
mesh dependent and not the discretization of a continuous coefficient. This will consequently increase the mesh
dependency of the overall method. Again, to recover the flow concentration/monodirectional effect sought by
SFD algorithm, on should instead resort to a continuous speed coefficient map km that presents high contrasts
with narrow zone with high values. The flow will then preferentially follow those regions creating the desired


                                                        29
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms




                           Table 1: A possible classification of MFD algorithms using (19)

 Method                                      δ{∆xy    γx “ γy        q                       km,σm,n
                                                                                ˇ
                                               ?         ?                                                m,n
                                                                                ˇ 1    σm,n has largest ∆Hi,j
                                                                                ˇ
                                                ?2        ?2
 D8 (O’Callaghan et al. 1984 [33])            2` 2      2` 2
                                                                     1          ˇ
                                                                                ˇ 0    otherwise
                                               ?         ?
                                                ?2        ?2
 MFD (Freeman 1989 [22])                      2` 2      2` 2
                                                                     1                            1
                                               ?         ?
                                                ?2        ?2
 MFD (Freeman 1991 [23])                      2` 2      2` 2
                                                                     1.1                          1
                                                                               ˇ
                                               ?         ?                                                  m,n
                                                                               ˇ 1    σm,n has largest ρ8 ∆Hi,j
                                                                               ˇ
                                                ?2        ?2
 Rho8 (Fairfield 1991 [20])                   2` 2      2` 2
                                                                     1         ˇ
                                                                               ˇ 0    otherwise
                                               ?
                                                 2        1
 FD8 (Quinn et al. 1991 [41])                   4         2          1                            1
                                               ?         ?
                                                 2         2
 MFD (Holmgren 1994 [28])                       ?
                                              2` 2
                                                          ?
                                                        2` 2
                                                                  P r1, 8r                        1
                                               ?
                                                 2       1
 TOPMODEL (Quinn et al. 1995 [42])              4        2       P r1 ´ 100s                      1
                                               ?
                                                 2       1
 MFD-md (Qin et al. 2007 [40])                  4        2          f peq                         1




channelization effect (see [12]).
The two point şflux approximation (TPFA) is of course not the only possible approximation for the terms
p∇hs qσi˘1,j˘1 ¨ σi˘1,j˘1 n. In particular, if one reconstructs an approximation Ĝs,σ of the full topographic
gradient along each face σ, then it can be used to compute an approximation of the flux. We denote it Ĝs,σ to
distinguish it from the reconstruction Gs,σ used to approximate the non-linear dependency in the slope, as the
two can be different. In this case, (19) becomes:
                                   m,n q
                                                                     ˜                       ¸
                      |σm,n |p∆Hi,j    q
                                                                                  ż
                                                          m,n
                   ÿ                       1 1   and ∆Hi,j “ max 0, Ĝs,σm,n ¨          nKi,j .           (20)
                                         m ,n q
                           |σm1 ,n1 |p∆Hi,j    q                                   σm,n

               m1 ,n1 PN pi,jq

Then, more flow routing algorithms of the literature can be rewritten this way. In particular, choosing γx “
γy “ 0 or 1 we can easily recover the flux decomposition method (Desmet et al. 1996 [16]) and a variation of the
MD8 method (Seibert et al. 2007 [47]). The flux decomposition method chooses a single value for Ĝs,Ki,j for
each cell, and then loop over cells and set Ĝs,σ “ Ĝs,Ki,j for the faces of the current cell that have not already
been handled through a previous cell in the loop. The MD8 methods computes Ĝs,σ for each face using a
triangular reconstruction of the slope: to be precise, with our notations Ĝs,σ is for face σm,n half the sum of
the two triangular gradients computed in [47] that can contribute to σm,n . We refer to this as a variation of
[47] as it is unclear whether they use the normal component of the gradient as we do here or the full norm of
the gradient in their flow sharing formula.

Other flow routing algorithms that do not easily fit into this mathematical framework are also available in the
literature. We mention in particular the ANSWERS ([6]), DEMON ([13]) and Lea’s method ([29]), that are
all based on a local planar approximation of the topography and use either a multiple or single direction flow
sharing formula based on purely geometric considerations. The D8 method (Tarboton 1997 [48]) strongly looks


                                                         30
                                            J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau




                     Table 2: A classification of some flow routing algorithms using (20)
                 Method                                                     δ{∆xy      γx “ γy      q   km,σl
                 Flux decomposition (Desmet et al. 1996 [16])                  0           1        1      1
                                                                              ?           ?
                                                                               ?2          ?2
                 MD8 (Seibert et al. 2007, [47])                             2` 2        2` 2
                                                                                                    1      1



like the SFD method at first sight, however because the flow sharing formula used when the steepest direction is
not aligned with mesh direction is based on angular considerations similar to those of ANSWERS and DEMON,
it is not immediately obvious how to relate the D8 method to a continuous model. Finally, let us mention that
many variations around the classical algorithms have been explored since their first publications leading for
instance to some generalization to triangular meshes [3, 57]. We refer the reader to [19, 56, 34] and references
therein for a broader review on flow routing algorithms and their numerical behavior.

3.2      Consistency post-processing for node-to-node MFD algorithms
The node-to-node situation is no better than the cell-to-cell one: qri,j will be as non consistent, non convergent
and thus strongly mesh dependent than its cell-to-cell counterpart. The node-to-node routing is indeed simply
a cell-to-cell routing on a dual mesh, with a more involved cell boundary decomposition. Again, the quantity
qri,j should not be used to couple with sediment evolution, one should instead reconstruct a consistent water
flux vector Qi,j for instance by setting:
                                                              m,n
                                         ÿ                   τi,j qri,j
                    Qi,j “                                              phs,i,j ´ hs,m,n qpxm,n
                                                                                            i,j ´ xKi,j q´
                                                            |Ki,j |si,j
                             pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ąhs,m,n

                                                         m,n
                                     ÿ                  τi,j qrm,n
                                                                   phs,m,n ´ hs,i,j qpxm,n
                                                                                       i,j ´ xKi,j q                          (21)
                                                       |Ki,j |sm,n
                        pm,nqPN pi,jq,hs,i,j ăhs,m,n

where:
             ˇ 1
             ˇ
             ˇ pxKi,j ` xKm,n q                                if pm, nq P tpi, j ´ 1q, pi, j ` 1q, pi ´ 1, jq, pi ` 1, jqu
             ˇ 2
      xm,n
       i,j “ ˇ
             ˇ        1       ` n            m
             ˇ |σ n | ` |σ m | |σm |xσm
                                      n ` |σ
                                            n |xσn
                                                   ˘
             ˇ                                   m             otherwise
                 m        n

and then use
                                                         qi,j “ ||Qi,j ||                                                     (22)
which again can be considered as an easy to implement post-processing consistency correction step. Again, this
should be done in conjunction with q “ 1 and a mesh independent km map.

3.3      Boundary terms
For the sake of completeness, let us briefly and graphically explain how to handle boundary terms. One first
needs to distinguish between corner boundary points and other boundary points. For a corner boundary point
pi, jq, we use the decomposition of the boundary of the dual cell presented on figure 19 while for a non corner
boundary point pi, jq we use the decomposition of the boundary of the dual cell presented on figure 20. The
principle is exactly the same as for an interior node pi, jq, but with a reduced set of neighbors and with a


                                                                31
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



                           pi, jq        σi`1            pi ` 1, jq         pi ` 2, jq
                                                 j´1
                                    σj´1        σi`1
                                          i`1
                                         σj´1



                       pi, j ´ 1q                        pi ` 1, j ´ 1q     pi ` 2, j ´ 1q




                       pi, j ´ 2q                        pi ` 1, j ´ 2q     pi ` 2, j ´ 2q




            Figure 19: Decomposition and notations for the dual corner cartesian cell boundaries




                           pi, j ` 1q                      pi ` 1, j ` 1q   pi ` 2, j ` 1q
                                            i`1
                                           σj`1
                                        σj`1       j`1
                                                  σi`1

                                           σi`1
                               pi, jq                      pi ` 1, jq       pi ` 2, jq
                                                   j´1
                                        σj´1      σi`1
                                            i`1
                                           σj´1



                       pi ´ 1, j ´ 1q                      pi ` 1, j ´ 1q   pi ` 2, j ´ 1q




             Figure 20: Decomposition and notations for the non-corner cartesian cell boundaries

                                               m,n
half reduction of the face length and thus of τi,j for non-diagonal neighbors. For the source terms associated
with those cells, one must also reduce by one fourth the magnitude of the cell size for a corner boundary point


                                                         32
                                       J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



and on half for a non corner boundary point, and those sources should be taken at the center of mass of the
corresponding boundary dual cells. Finally, one needs to add to the source term the integral of Bw along the
part of the boundary of the cells that belong to BΩin .

3.4    Numerical results for the corrected node-to-node MFD algorithms

                       (a)                              (b)




                              MFD Freeman 1989                        FD8
      (c)                               (d)                             (e)




             MFD Freeman 1991                 MFD Holmgren 1994                 MFD TOPMODEL

Figure 21: Results for constant km on the finest Cartesian mesh with square cells sequence for the node-to-node
MFD algorithms


We consider the same two test configurations than in the cell-to-cell case, and only the Cartesian mesh sequence
with square cells. For the first test configuration, we start by presenting on figure 21 in the case of constant
km the reconstruction qij for five MFD schemes: MFD (Freeman 1989), FD8, MFD (Freeman 1991), MFD
(Holmgren 1994) and TOPMODEL, chossing a value q “ 10 for MFD (Holmgren 1994) and TOPMODEL. As
expected, the two schemes with q “ 1, namely MFD (Freeman 1989) and FD8 lead to the correct solution. For
the three others, because q ‰ 1 we see that we do not get the expected result, thus confirming our theoretical
observations. Of course, the same can be observed for the sinusoidal km or the Perlin noised km . Since MFD
(Freeman 1991), MFD (Holmgren 1994) are identical to MFD (Freeman 1989) and TOPMODEL and MFD-md
are identical to FD8 if we take q “ 1, for our remaining experiments we restrict ourselves to MFD (Freeman


                                                      33
    A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                              algorithms



1989) and FD8.

                       Constant km                           Sinusoidal km                           Perlin km


          −3                                    −3                                     −2

          −4                                    −4                                     −3

log || · ||L2
          −5                                    −5                                     −4
          −6                                    −6                                     −5
          −7                     MFD 1989       −7                      MFD 1989       −6                        MFD 1989
                                   FD8                                    FD8                                      FD8
          −8                                    −8
                 −4    −3 −2         −1     0          −4    −3 −2           −1    0         −4    −3 −2           −1       0
                         log                                  log                                  log 

         Figure 22: Convergence curves for qi,j towards qw for the first test configuration, for each choice for km


On figure 22, we present the convergence curves for those two schemes on the first test configuration for the
three choices of speed coefficient km . We clearly recover the expected convergence, confirming the quality of
the post-processing qi,j for node-to-node algorithms.
On figure 23, we present the convergence curves for those two schemes on the second test configuration for the
three values of pw and the three choices of couple prs , ps q. Again, those curves confirm the good behavior of qi,j .
Notice that the convergence curves are almost impossible to distinguish for this second test case configuration
between the two schemes, indicating that they produce almost identical results.


                                     4    Limitations of the GMS model
The application domain of the GMS model is limited by some additional requirements on the topography hs .
Because of the equivalence of MFD algorithms with the GMS model, they will suffer from the same limitations.
Mathematically, systems (1) and (3) are stationary transport problems for a or hw . Their well-posedness,
i.e. existence and uniqueness in a suitable function space and continuity with respect to data, is rigorously
established only under some condition on the topography, all introducing some positivity requirement in the
zero order part of the differential operators applied to a or hw (see [11, 4, 52, 17, 21, 25]). In particular, among
the possible assumptions on the topography the simplest ones are undoubtedly:
                                                        ´                       ¯
                              ´∆hs ą 0 or        ´ div km s´p             pw
                                                              ref ||∇hs || ∇hs ą 0,
                                                                 w
                                                                                                                 (23)

They both ensure that model (3) is well-posed by enforcing that a downflow direction exists everywhere, at
the price of introducing quite stringent restrictions on the admissible topographies. Moreover, the convergence
theory of [11] is established assuming such a condition on the topography. Notice that they are sufficient con-
ditions, and not necessary ones: this implies that solutions to (1) and (3) can still exist for some topographies
not fulfilling one of the sufficient conditions, and numerical convergence of the consistent water flux can still
be observed. In particular, saddle-point or valley-like topographies will not easily fulfill those conditions, while
it seems reasonable to assume that a solution will exist in such configurations since water can find a downflow
direction. This being said, those probably too strong mathematical requirement should act as a warning, as it


                                                            34
                                                        J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



                                                                 MFD Freeman 1989
                              rs = 1, ps = 0                         rs = 3/2, ps = 1                      rs = 2, ps = 0



                     2                                                                            2
                                                           0


log ||qK − qw ||L2
                     0                                                                            0
                                                         −2
              −2                                                                                 −2
                                                         −4
                                               pw = 0                                   pw = 0                              pw = 0
              −4                               pw = 1
                                                                                                 −4                         pw = 1
                                                                                        pw = 1
                                               pw = 2    −6                             pw = 2                              pw = 2

                         −4    −3 −2           −1               −4     −3 −2            −1            −4    −3 −2           −1
                                 log                                    log                                 log 


                                                                          FD8
                              rs = 1, ps = 0                         rs = 3/2, ps = 1                      rs = 2, ps = 0



                     2                                                                            2
                                                           0


log ||qK − qw ||L2
                     0                                                                            0
                                                         −2
              −2                                                                                 −2
                                                         −4
                                               pw = 0                                   pw = 0                              pw = 0
              −4                               pw = 1                                   pw = 1
                                                                                                 −4                         pw = 1
                                               pw = 2    −6                             pw = 2                              pw = 2

                         −4    −3 −2           −1               −4     −3 −2            −1            −4    −3 −2           −1
                                 log                                    log                                 log 

Figure 23: Convergence curves for qi,j towards qw for the second test configuration, for each value of pw and
for each value of the couple prs , ps q



clearly reveals that not all topographies may be admissible for model (1) and its generalization (3).
Using the notations of section 2.2, this is reflected at the discrete level by the cancellation of sK for certain con-
figurations. Coefficient sK will cancel for a cell K such that all its neighboring cells L are such that hs,L ě hs,K .
Since sK “ 0, it prevents us from distributing water outside of K. For such a cell K, the MFD will lead to an
abrupt stop of the water flow in cell K. Moreover this prevents to recompute a correct approximation of hw,K
from the intermediate unknown qrK used in MFD algorithms, since we cannot invert qrK “ sK hw,K ηw phw,K q.
Such configurations correspond mostly to flat areas as well as accumulation areas. We can infer that this is a
discrete indicator of what could be the weakest theoretical requirements on the topography for models (1) and


                                                                     35
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



(3) to be well posed: the absence of flat or accumulation areas. One way to circumvent those limitations is to
resort to more involved non-linear water flow models such as the one proposed in [12].

                                                     Conclusion
After introducing a general Gauckler-Manning-Strickler model, we have generalized the results of [11] to a larger
family of cell-to-cell MFD algorithms showing that their output coincides to an intermediate discrete quantity
qrK occurring when applying the TPFA finite volume scheme to discretize the GMS model. Thanks to this
reinterpretation, we have shown that following the idea of [11] one can reconstruct a consistent discrete water
flux magnitude qK from this intermediate quantity in a post-processing step. Numerical examples illustrate
that the discrete water flux magnitude is as mesh independent as one could hope for and successfully converges
to the continuous water flux magnitude. This discrete water flux magnitude qK should thus be considered as
the correct output of a MFD algorithm, instead of qrK or normalized versions of it. Then, we have extended
those results to node-to-node MFD algorithms, presenting a classification of most classical algorithms of the
literature using the GMS model as basis. The same post-processing correction was presented and numerical
example illustrate that it again successfully solve the anomalous mesh dependency issues. Finally, we have
recalled the main limitations of the GMS model, emphasizing in particular through our reinterpretation of the
MFD algorithms that flat or accumulation areas require special treatments beyond the MFD algorithms. We
believe that the post-processing correction presented here can benefit existing software/models relying on MFD
algorithms.

                                                     References
 [1] J. J. Armitage. Short communication: flow as distributed lines within the landscape. Earth Surface Dynamics,
     7(1):67–75, 2019.

 [2] E. Audusse, F. Bouchut, M.-O. Bristeau, R. Klein, and B. Perthame. A fast and stable well-balanced scheme with
     hydrostatic reconstruction for shallow water flows. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 25(6):2050–2065, 2004.

 [3] D. Banninger. Technical note: Water flow routing on irregular meshes. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., Vol. 11, pp.
     1243-1247, 2007.

 [4] C. Bardos. Problèmes aux limites pour les équations aux dérivées partielles du premier ordre à coefficients réels ;
     théorèmes d’approximation ; application à l’équation de transport. Ann. Sci. Ec. Norm. Sup. Ser. 4, Vol. 3, pp.
     185-233, 1970.

 [5] P. D. Bates, M. S. Horritt, and T. J. Fewtrell. A simple inertial formulation of the shallow water equations for
     efficient two-dimensional flood inundation modelling. Journal of Hydrology, 387(1):33–45, 2010.

 [6] D . B. Beasley, L. F. Huggins, and E. J. Monke. Answers: A model for watershed planning. Transactions of the
     ASAE, Vol. 23(4), pp. 938-944, 1980.

 [7] B. Birnir, T. R. Smith, and G. E. Merchant. The scaling of fluvial landscapes. Comput. Geosci., 27(10):1189–1216,
     2001.

 [8] S. Bonetti, A. D. Bragg, and A. Porporato. On the theory of drainage area for regular and non-regular points. Proc.
     R. Soc. A 474: 20170693, 2018.

 [9] J. Braun and S. D. Willett. A very efficient o(n), implicit and parallel method to solve the stream power equation
     governing fluvial incision and landscape evolution. Geomorphology, 180-181:170–179, 2013.

[10] S. Carretier, L. Guerit, R. Harries, V. Regard, P. Maffre, and S. Bonnet. The distribution of sediment residence
     times at the foot of mountains and its implications for proxies recorded in sedimentary basins. Earth and Planetary
     Science Letters, 546:116448, 2020.


                                                             36
                                          J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



[11] J. Coatléven. Some multiple flow direction algorithms for overland flow on general meshes. ESAIM: Mathematical
     Modelling and Numerical Analysis, Vol. 54 (6), pp. 1917-1949, 2020.

[12] J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau. Large structure simulation for landscape evolution models. Earth Surface Dynamics,
     12(5):995–1026, 2024.

[13] M. C. Costa-Cabral and S. J. Burge. Digital elevation model networks (demon): A model of flow over hillslopes for
     computation of contributing and dispersal areas. Water resources research, Vol. 30(6), pp. 1681-1692, 1994.

[14] T. J. Coulthard, J. C. Neal, P. D. Bates, J. Ramirez, G. A. M. de Almeida, and G. R. Hancock. Integrating the
     lisflood-fp 2d hydrodynamic model with the caesar model: implications for modelling landscape evolution. Earth
     Surface Processes and Landforms, 38(15):1897–1906, 2013.

[15] P. Davy, T. Croissant, and D. Lague. A precipiton method to calculate river hydrodynamics, with applications to
     flood prediction, landscape evolution models, and braiding instabilities. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth
     Surface, 122(8):1491–1512, 2017.

[16] P. J. J. Desmet and G. Govers. Comparison of routing algorithms for digital elevation models and their implication
     for predicting ephemeral gullies. Int. J. Geo. Inf. Syst., Vol. 10(3), pp. 311-331, 1996.

[17] R.J. DiPerna and P.L. Lions. Ordinary differential equations, transport theory and sobolev spaces. Invent. Math.
     98, 511-547, 1989.

[18] David L. Egholm, Mads F. Knudsen, Chris D. Clark, and Jerome E. Lesemann. Modeling the flow of glaciers in
     steep terrains: The integrated second-order shallow ice approximation (isosia). Journal of Geophysical Research:
     Earth Surface, 116(F2), 2011.

[19] R. H. Erskine, T. R. Green, J. A. Ramirez, and L. H. MacDonald. Comparison of grid-based algorithms for
     computing upslope contributing area. Water Resour. Res., Vol. 42, W09416, 2006.

[20] J. Fairfield and P. Leymarie. Drainage networks from grid digital elevation model. Water resources research, Vol.
     27(5), pp. 709-717, 1991.

[21] E. Fernández-Cara, F. Guillén, and R.R. Ortega. Mathematical modeling and analysis of visco-elastic fluids of the
     oldroyd kind. P.G. Ciarlet, J.L. Lions (Eds.), Numerical Methods for Fluids, Part 2, in: Handbook of Numerical
     Analysis, vol. VIII, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 543–661, 2002.

[22] T. G. Freeman. Drainage with divergent flow over a regular grid. Proc. 8th Biennial Conf. Simulation Society of
     Australia, Canberra, pp. 160-165, 1989.

[23] T. G. Freeman. Calculating catchment area with divergent flow based on a regular grid. Computers & Geosciences
     Vol. 17(3), pp. 413-422, 1991.

[24] J. C. Gallant and M. F. Hutchinson. A differential equation for specific catchment area. Water resources research,
     Vol. 47, W05535, 2011.

[25] V. Girault and L. Tartar. lp and w1,p regularity of the solution of a steady transport equation. C. R. Acad. Sci.
     Paris, Ser. I, Vol. 348, pp. 885-890, 2010.

[26] W. H. Graf and M. S. Altinakar. Hydraulique fluviale: Ecoulement et phénomènes de transport dans les canaux à
     géométrie simple. Traité de génie civil, vol. 16, Presses polytechniques et universitaires romandes, 2000.

[27] D. Granjeon. 3D forward modelling of the impact of sediment transport and base level cycles on continental margins
     and incised valleys, chapter 16, pages 453–472. 2014.

[28] P. Holmgren. Multiple flow direction algorithms for runoff modelling in grid based elevation models: an empirical
     evaluation. Hydrological processes, Vol. 8, pp. 327-334, 1994.

[29] N. L. Lea. An aspect driven kinematic routing algorithm. In A. J. Parsons and A.D. Abrahams, editors, Overland
     Flow: Hydraulics and Erosion Mechanics, chapter 16. Chapman and Hall, New York, 1992.


                                                          37
 A post-processing to restore numerical consistency for the most classical multiple flow direction
                                           algorithms



[30] L. B. Leopold, M. G. Wolman, and J. P. Miller. Fluvial Processes in Geomorphology. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco,
     California, 1964.

[31] J. C. Maxwell. On hills and dales. Philos. Mag. J. Sci., Vol. 4/40(269), pp. 421-427, 1870.

[32] M. Nones. On the main components of landscape evolution modelling of river systems. Acta Geophys. Vol 68, pp
     459–475, 2020.

[33] J. F. O’Callaghan and D. M. Mark. The extraction of drainage networks from digital elevation data. Computer
     vision, graphics and image processing, Vol. 28, pp. 323-344, 1984.

[34] S. Orlandini and G. Moretti. Determination of surface flow paths from gridded elevation data. Water Resour. Res.,
     Vol. 45, W03417, 2009.

[35] J. D. Pelletier. Minimizing the grid-resolution dependence of flow-routing algorithms for geomorphic applications.
     Geomorphology, Vol. 122 , pp. 91-98, 2010.

[36] J.D. Pelletier. 2.3 fundamental principles and techniques of landscape evolution modeling. In John F. Shroder,
     editor, Treatise on Geomorphology, pages 29–43. Academic Press, San Diego, 2013.

[37] K. Perlin. An image synthesizer. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics, 19(3):287–296, 1985.

[38] J. T. Perron, J. W. Kirchner, and W. E. Dietrich. Formation of evenly spaced ridges and valleys. Nature, Vol. 460,
     pp. 502-505, 2009.

[39] A. Porporato. Hydrology without dimensions. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., Vol. 26, pp. 355-374, 2022.

[40] C. Qin, A.-X. Zhu, T. Pei, B. Li, C. Zhou, and L. Yang. An adaptive approach to selecting a flow-partition exponent
     for a multiple-flow-direction algorithm. International Journal of Geographical Information Science Vol. 21(4), pp.
     443-458, 2007.

[41] P. Quinn, K. Beven, P. Chevallier, and O. Planchon. The prediction of hillslope flow paths for distributed hydrological
     modelling using digital terrain models. Hydrological processes, Vol. 5, pp. 59-79, 1991.

[42] P. Quinn, K. Beven, and R. Lamb. The lnpa tan βq index : how to calculate it and how to use it within the topmodel
     framework. Hydrological processes, Vol. 9, pp. 161-182, 1995.

[43] A. Richardson, C. N. Hill, and J. T. Perron. Ida: An implicit, parallelizable method for calculating drainage area.
     Water Resour. Res. Vol. 50, pp. 4110-4130, 2014.

[44] T. Salles. escape: parallel global-scale landscape evolution model. Journal of Open Source Software, 3(30):964,
     2018.

[45] T. Salles, N. Flament, and D. Müller. Influence of mantle flow on the drainage of eastern australia since the jurassic
     period. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 18(1):280–305, 2017.

[46] J. M. Schoorl, M. P. W. Sonneveld, and A. Veldkamp. Three-dimensional landscape process modelling: the effect
     of dem resolution. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, Vol 25(9), pp 1025-1034, 2000.

[47] J. Seibert and B. L. McGlynn. A new triangular multiple flow direction algorithm for computing upslope areas from
     gridded digital elevation models. Water Resour. Res., Vol. 43, W04501, 2007.

[48] D. G. Tarboton. A new method for the determination of flow directions and upslope areas in grid digital elevation
     models. Water resources research, Vol. 33(2), pp. 309-319, 1997.

[49] G. E. Tucker and G. R. Hancock. Modelling landscape evolution. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 35(1):28–
     50, 2010.

[50] D. Valters. Modelling Geomorphic Systems: Landscape Evolution, page 6.5.12. 05 2016.


                                                            38
                                          J. Coatléven and B. Chauveau



[51] P. A. Van der Beek. Environmental Modelling: Finding Simplicity in Complexity, pages 309–332. 2nd Edition (eds.
     J. Wainwright and M. Mulligan), Wiley, Chichester, 2013.

[52] H. Beirão Da Veiga. Existence results in sobolev spaces for a stationary transport equation. Ricerche Mat. Suppl.
     XXXVI pp. 173-184, 1987.

[53] G. Willgoose. User manual for SIBERIA (Version 8.30). 2005.

[54] G. Willgoose, R.L. Bras, and I. Rodriguez-Iturbe. A physically based channel networkand catchment evolution model.
     PhD thesis, TR 322, Ralph M. Parsons Laboratory, Dept. ofCivil Engineering, MIT, Boston, M, 1989.

[55] Garry Willgoose, Rafael L. Bras, and Ignacio Rodriguez-Iturbe. A coupled channel network growth and hillslope
     evolution model: 1. theory. Water Resources Research, 27(7):1671–1684, 1991.

[56] J. P. Wilson, G. Aggett, Y. Deng, and C. S. Lam. Water in the Landscape: A Review of Contemporary Flow Routing
     Algorithms, pages 213–236. Qiming Zhou and Brian Lees and Guo-an Tang. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Springer
     Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.

[57] Q. Zhou, P. Pilesjö, and Y. Chen. Estimating surface flow paths on a digital elevation model using a triangular
     facet network. Water Resour. Res., Vol. 47, W07522, 2011.




                                                          39
